Joshua Elliott
November 28, 2013
Web Programming Fundamentals
Problem Solving


A Cat, A Parrot, and a Bag of Seed

The Problem: The man with a cat, parrot, and bag of seed cannot cross the river with all three items at the same time, but cannot leave the bird with the seed or cat with the bird.  The objective is to get all items across the river in tact with the man by making several trips.

Insight: Any item can be left alone, but only one pair can be left together without consequence: the cat and birdseed.  This means the first trip must be the man and the parrot.

Goal:  Take items across the river with the man in his boat, one at a time, without leaving the wrong two items together.

Constraints and sub-goals:  The cat and parrot and parrot and seed cannot be left alone together.  Only one item can be taken by boat at a time.

Potential Solution:  Move the parrot across the river.  Return alone.  Move the cat across the river. Return with the parrot.  Move the birdseed across the river. Return alone. Move the parrot across the river.

Evaluation:  Working through the problem, the items can be moved in this manner without violating the rules, and it results in the objective being met.

Final Explanation: First, the man must take the parrot across the river.  This leaves the cat and seed—the only two items that can be left alone together.  He returns alone to the original shore and picks up the cat, leaving the birdseed alone.  When he makes the other shore, he cannot leave these two items alone, so he will leave the cat and take the parrot back with him on the return trip.  He will swap the parrot for the seed and make his trip back across again, leaving the seed with the cat on the far bank of the river.  His return trip is made alone.  He picks up the parrot and makes his final trip across the river.


Socks in the Dark:

The Problem: With 20 socks in a drawer, 10 pair total (5 black, 3 brown, 2 white).  By selecting socks in the dark, we are attempting to determine the smallest number of socks that can be selected before we can guarantee we have at least one matching pair.  Then again, but getting a matching pair of each color.
Insight:  This is an issue with statistics.  Guaranteeing matching sock pairs will likely be calculated based on the number of socks and number of colors represented.

Goal: The goal is to pick the minimum number of  socks required to guarantee a matching pair and a matching pair of each color.

Sub-Problems:  There are two problems at work here, one to calculate the smallest number of  socks to guarantee one matching pair, the second to guarantee one pair of each color.

Potential Solution:  To select a single matching pair, one would have to account for a most getting one sock from each color type plus one.  For example, with three colors of socks, you would never need more than four (three plus one) socks to make a matching pair.

To guarantee at least one matching pair of each color, we would have to assume that at worst, a person would select each of the two colors that have the most pair plus one from the remaining number of pair.  With 5 black, 3 brown, 2 white, to guarantee a person has at least one pair of each color, one would have to pull enough socks to equate to 8 pair (5+3) plus 1.  All but two socks.

Evaluation: For the first problem, there are only three possible selections: black, brown, and white.  Assuming the worst case, a person could select all three of these colors without making a matching pair.  At the fourth selection, it is impossible to not have a matching pair.

For the second problem, it operates on a larger scale but uses the same principle.  With 20 total socks, to get one of each matching pair, we’d have to look at the smallest number of colored pair—2 white pair, four total socks. This indicates that it would be possible to select 16 socks without ever getting a white sock.  Adding two white socks to that means a person could potentially pick 18 of the 20 socks before they would have one matching pair of each color.

Final Explanation: If you have 20 socks in a drawer, 10 black, 6 brown, and 4 white,  how many would you have to pick to get a single matching pair?  That number cannot be more than the number of colored pairs +1.  This solution works with the problem regardless of how many colored pair are in the drawer.  Even with 10 colored pair, a person cannot pick more than 11 socks without getting a matching pair.

On the second part of the problem, it is possible to pick every sock from each type before picking a colored pair from the smallest number of pair.  In this case, the white socks are the smallest number of pair at two (four socks).  Then, add one pair from that last set to make 18 socks total before we can guarantee one of each color is picked.



Predicting Fingers:

Someone is counting fingers starting on the thumb of the left hand, 1-5 (5 being the little finger), then reversing direction (ending on 9 at the thumb) before reversing direction again.  In this case, how would you determine what finger they would finish counting on going from 1-10, 1-100, then 1-1000?

a. What if the girl counts from 1 to 10
b. What if the girl counts from 1 to 100
c. What if the girl counts from 1 to 1000
